[IMP] accounting/l10n_ec: expense reimbursements (#11581)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/fiscal_localizations/ecuador.rst

> Introduction
> ============
> 

Reviewer: I don't think this "Introduction" heading is needed, the page could start with line 8.
```suggestion
```

- :guilabel:`Short Code`: Enter a unique 5-digit code for the accounting entry sequence (e.g.,
  `PT001`).

Finally, in the :guilabel:`Advanced Settings` tab, check the :guilabel:`Electronic invoicing`
checkbox to enable sending XML/EDI invoices.

Configure master data
---------------------

Chart of accounts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`chart of accounts <../accounting/get_started/chart_of_accounts>` is installed by default
as part of the set of data included in the localization module. The accounts are mapped
automatically in *Taxes*, *Default Account Payable*, *Default Account Receivable*.

Ecuador's chart of accounts is based on the most updated version of the *Superintendency of
Companies*, which is grouped into several categories and is compatible with NIIF accounting.

Accounts can be added or deleted according to the company's needs.

Products
~~~~~~~~

If products have any withholding taxes, they must be configured on the product form.

Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Vendors --> Products`. On the :guilabel:`General Information`
tab, specify both :guilabel:`Purchase Taxes` and :guilabel:`Profit Withhold`.

Review taxes
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> As part of the localization module, taxes are automatically created with its configuration and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The localization module automatically creates and configures taxes. If new taxes need to be created,
it is recommended to base them on the configuration of the existing ones.
```

- :guilabel:`Withhold lines`: The taxes appear automatically according to the configuration of
  products and vendors. Review if the taxes and tax support are correct. If not, edit and select
  the correct taxes and tax support.

Then, validate the :guilabel:`Withholding`.

.. note::
   Tax support types must be configured on the :guilabel:`Vendor Bill`. To do so, go to the tax
   applied on the :guilabel:`Vendor Bill` and change the :guilabel:`Tax Support` there.

A withholding tax can be divided into two or more lines, depending on whether two or more
withholdings percentages apply.

.. example::
   The system suggests a VAT withholding of 30% with tax support 01. VAT withholding of 70% can be
   added in a new line with the same tax support. Odoo allows it if the base total matches the
   :guilabel:`Vendor Bill`'s total.

Expense reimbursement
---------------------

Expense reimbursements apply to the following cases:

- :guilabel:`Individual`: reimbursement to an employee for miscellaneous expenses (e.g. purchase
  liquidations)
- :guilabel:`Legal Entity`: reimbursement for incurred expenses, such as representation expenses
  (e.g. hiring a lawyer)

> - :ref:`Vendor Bills <l10n_ec/vendor-bills>`

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this line, I am not sure why it is included either :)

  details for each expense:

  - :guilabel:`Partner or authorization number`
  - :guilabel:`Date`
  - :guilabel:`Document Type`
  - :guilabel:`Document Number`
  - :guilabel:`Tax Base`
  - :guilabel:`Tax`

To automatically populate the invoice lines, click the :guilabel:`Auto Fill Invoice Lines`. Then,
click :guilabel:`Confirm Vendor Bill` and :guilabel:`Process Now`. The XML and authorization number
for the purchase liquidation are recorded, and the purchase withholding created from this vendor
bill includes the reimbursement information.

.. note::
   It is not necessary to link a product in the expense lines. After adding the reimbursement lines,
   more lines can be added to represent other expenses that are not reimbursements.

eCommerce
---------

The :ref:`ATS Report module <l10n_ec/ats>` enables the following:

- Choose the *SRI Payment Method* for each payment method's configuration.
- Customers can manually input their identification type and number during eCommerce checkout.
- Automatically generate a valid electronic invoice for Ecuador at the end of the checkout process.

.. seealso::
   :doc:`eCommerce documentation <../../websites/ecommerce>`

> Configuration

Author: Hello! @auva-odoo 
Thank you for your feedback, I agree with your suggestions.
For your questions, I'm able to see the payment providers on a database Ecuadorian company, please let me know if you are referring to the following:
![2025-03-11_14-43](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a824961a-12e4-408a-8a82-6ea1056e3e72)
![2025-03-11_14-43_1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/01e8f151-67a4-4eff-a9f8-a342dccfea56)

For online payments, it's important to Ecuador to specify the SRI payment method field on the payment methods setting, it's the only thing that you need different from the rest of the localizations. 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f2b62b28-660e-4b48-b235-77ff7ea5a8b4)

Please let me know if you have more questions.
Regards!

> Configuration

Reviewer 3: @danielacanez Thanks for the quick reply! That makes sense—it must have been the databases I was testing on. Appreciate the clarification! My suggestion still stands then :slightly_smiling_face: .

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:guilabel:`Customer invoices` are electronic documents that, when validated, are sent to SRI. These
documents can be :doc:`created from your sales order or manually
<../accounting/customer_invoices/overview>`.

They must contain the following data:

- :guilabel:`Journal`: Select the option matching the customer invoice's printer point.
- :guilabel:`Document Type`: Type the document type in this format: `(01) Invoice`.
- :guilabel:`Payment Method (SRI)`: Select how the invoice will be paid.

.. seealso::
   :doc:`Manage customer invoices <../accounting/customer_invoices/overview>`

Customer credit note
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`customer credit note <../accounting/customer_invoices/credit_notes>` is an electronic
document that, when validated, is sent to SRI. A validated (posted) invoice is necessary to register
a credit note.

On the invoice, click :guilabel:`Credit note` and complete the following information in the
:guilabel:`Credit note` window:

> - :guilabel:`Reason`: type the reason for the credit note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :guilabel:`Reason`: Type the reason for the credit note.
```

> - :guilabel:`Journal`: select the journal for the reversal.
> - :guilabel:`Document Type`: by default, :guilabel:`(04) Credit Note` is selected.
> - :guilabel:`Reversal date`: set the date for the reversal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :guilabel:`Journal`: Select the journal for the reversal.
- :guilabel:`Document Type`: By default, :guilabel:`(04) Credit Note` is selected.
- :guilabel:`Reversal date`: Set the date for the reversal.
```

Then, click :guilabel:`Reverse` to first review the invoice or click :guilabel:`Reverse and Create
Invoice`.

.. note::
   When creating the first credit note, select :guilabel:`Reverse` and assign the first credit note
   number.

Once the credit note is created, the amount can be modified before validating. Make sure the correct
:guilabel:`Customer`, :guilabel:`Journal`, and :guilabel:`Document Type` are specified, and
the products listed on the :guilabel:`Invoice Lines` tab are configured with the correct taxes.

To validate, click :guilabel:`Confirm`.

Customer debit note
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The :guilabel:`Customer debit note` is an electronic document that, when validated, is sent to SRI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`customer debit note <accounting/issue-debit-note>` is an electronic document that, when validated, is sent to SRI.
```

A validated (posted) invoice is necessary to register a debit note. Select the related invoice to
issue a debit note in the :guilabel:`Invoices` list view, click :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`Actions`

> and select :guilabel:`Create Debit Note`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and select :guilabel:`Create Debit Note`. Then, complete the following information in the 
:guilabel:`Create Debit Note` window
```

- :guilabel:`Reason`: Enter the reason for the debit note.

> - :guilabel:`Debit note date`: Select the :guilabel:`specific` options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :guilabel:`Debit note date`: Set the debit note date.
```

- :guilabel:`Copy lines`: Select this option to register a debit note with the same lines of
  invoice.
- :guilabel:`Use Specific Journal`: Select the printer point for your credit note, or leave it empty
  to use the same journal as the original invoice.

Then, click :guilabel:`Create Debit Note`.

The debit note amount can be changed, if desired.

> .. seealso::
>    :ref:`Issue a customer debit note <accounting/issue-debit-note>`

Reviewer: As I added this info as a :ref: markup at the beginning of the section, it's no longer needed here.
```suggestion
```

These types of electronic documents can be created from the *purchase order* or manually from the
*vendor bills* form. Purchase liquidations must contain the following data:

- :guilabel:`Vendor`: Enter the vendor's information.
- :guilabel:`Journal`: Select the :guilabel:`Purchase Liquidation` journal with the correct printer
  point.
- :guilabel:`Document Type`: Enter this document type: `(03) Purchase Liquidation`
- :guilabel:`Document number`: Enter the document number (sequence). This must only be entered once,
  and the sequence will automatically be assigned to the subsequent documents.
- :guilabel:`Payment Method (SRI)`: Select how the invoice is going to be paid.
- :guilabel:`Products`: Specify the product with the correct taxes.

Once the information has been reviewed, validate the :guilabel:`Purchase Liquidation`.

Purchase withholding
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *Purchase withholding* is an electronic document that, when validated, is sent to SRI.

An invoice in a validated state is necessary before registering a :guilabel:`Purchase withholding`.
On the invoice, click :guilabel:`Add Withhold` and complete the following fields in the
:guilabel:`Withholding` window:

> - :guilabel:`Document number`: Enter the document number (sequence). This will only need to be
>   entered once, and then the sequence will be automatically assigned for the next documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :guilabel:`Document number`: Enter the document number (sequence). This must only be entered once,
  and the sequence will automatically be assigned for the next documents.
```

.. seealso::
   :doc:`Manage customer invoices <../accounting/customer_invoices/overview>`

Customer credit note
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`Customer credit note <../accounting/customer_invoices/credit_notes>` is an electronic
document that, when validated, is sent to SRI. A validated (posted) invoice is necessary to register
a credit note.

On the invoice, click :guilabel:`Credit note` and complete the following information in the
:guilabel:`Credit note` window.

- :guilabel:`Credit Method`: Select the type of credit method.

  - :guilabel:`Partial Refund`: Use this option to type the first number of documents,
    and if it is a partial credit note.
  - :guilabel:`Full Refund`: Use this option if the credit note is for the total invoice, and the
    credit note needs to be auto-validated and reconciled with the invoice.
  - :guilabel:`Full refund and new draft invoice`: Use this option if the credit note is for the
    total invoice, the credit note needs to be auto-validated and reconciled with the
    invoice, and to auto-create a new draft invoice.

- :guilabel:`Rollback Date`: Select the :guilabel:`specific` options.
- :guilabel:`Reversal Date`: Enter the date.

> Then, click :guilabel:`Reverse`.

Author: Hello AMFA, you're correct, we have this change in version 18. I'll work on updating this new version.

When the :guilabel:`Partial Refund` option is used, the amount of the credit note can be changed and

> validated. Make sure to specify the relevant product with the correct taxes for a partial refund.

Reviewer: If the Partial Refund/Full Refund/Full refund and new draft invoice options are not available, then this part should be updated.

Author: Hello @afma-odoo i will make these changes next week for 18v. 
Thank you for your feedback
